=======================
 Architecture Overview
=======================

In this chapter, we take a look at how the project is structured and how the
different components fit together.

.. figure:: resources/nitro-architecture.svg
   :align: center
   :alt: Nitro's architecture

   Main components of Nitro. Listener receives low-level events from the kernel
   and passes them to the user through the frameworks namesake :class:`~.Nitro`
   class. The user can then decide to request for additional analysis from one
   of Nitro's back ends. Back ends transform the low-level events into system
   call events that contain additional useful information such as the process
   where the system call originated and offer an easy way to access the
   arguments of the call.

Virtual Machines
================

Nitro depends on `libvirt <https://libvirt.org>`__ to manage virtual machine
life cycle and configuration for it. Through the libvirt API, Nitro can start,
stop and pause virtual machines without having to directly deal with the
hypervisor.

Internally, QEMU makes use of Linux's `KVM
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kernel-based_Virtual_Machine>`__ feature for
supporting hardware assisted virtualization.

libvirt's `documentation <https://libvirt.org/docs.html>`__ offers additional
instructions on how to install and use it to effectively manage virtual
machines.

Nitro
=====

Framework's namesake :class:`~.Nitro` class acts as a frontend for accessing
much of the functionality. By creating a Nitro object, we can start listening
for events from the virtual machine and, optionally, access an analysis back end
associated with the guest's operating system.

Throughout the framework, you will find a heavy use of Python's `context
managers <https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#typecontextmanager>`__
in the APIs to ease reasource management. For example, :class:`~.Nitro` objects
automatically stop their associated :ref:`listeners <listeners>` and, if
instantiated, :ref:`back ends <backends>`.

.. _listeners:

Event Listeners
===============

Nitro's :class:`~.Listener` enables subscribing to events from the kernel
regarding a particular virtual machine. Listener issues a set of Nitro specific
`IOCTL <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ioctl>`__ commands to the KVM in order to
attach to a particular virtual CPU belonging to the virtual machine being
monitored.

Listener's :meth:`~.Listener.listen` method is a generator that produces a
series of :class:`~.NitroEvent` objects. These objects represent the low-level
state of the machine when the system call took place. They contain information
about the registers and whether the machine was entering or exiting a system
call. Additionally, the events record which of the (possibly many) virtual CPU's
associated with the machine was responsible the event.

.. _backends:

Analysis Back ends
==================

While knowing the register values is nice, for many real-world applications a
higher-level view of the system if often preferred. :class:`~.Backend` classes
transform the lower-level events that listeners produce into something more
useful. Since back ends depend on intricate knowledge of operating system
specific internals, they are specific to a particular operating system. Nitro
ships with back ends for 64-bit Windows 7 Professional and Linux. The
:class:`~.Nitro` class automatically initializes a suitable back end based on
the virtual machine's operating system.

Back ends :meth:`process_event` produces a :class:`~.Syscall` object based on
the :class:`~.NitroEvent` object given to it. System call objects offer a
higher-level representation of the machine's state by associating the event with
a logical name (``open``, ``write``, ``NtCreateProcess``â€¦) and finding the
process that caused it.

For the analysis to be possible, back ends have to have access to the virtual
machines memory. This access is granted by the custom version of QEMU that Nitro
depends on. The current back ends make use of `libvmi <http://libvmi.com/>`__ to
dissect virtual machine's memory.

Process Info Objects
====================

As a whole, virtual machines typically produce a lot of system call events. For
practical purposes, it is often useful to concentrate only on a tiny fraction of
the events that the system produces. Knowing which process caused the event is
useful for separating interesting events from the noise.

Back ends associate each system call with the process that originated them.
Process information is stored in :class:`~.Process` objects. These are specific
to each back end as they can contain operating system specific process
information. For example, the Windows specific :class:`~.WindowsProcess` class
knows whether or not the process is running in the 32-bit mode. What is common
between the different implementations is the process objects all contain some
form of process ID and the name of the program binary associated with the
process.

System Call Argument Access
===========================

With analysis back ends, we can have a rough idea about what the system is doing
by looking at which system calls processes are invoking. However, this is often
not enough as we would like to also know the arguments for each call. It is much
more useful to know which file the monitored program is trying to access than to
simply know that it is trying to access something. For this purpose, analysis
back ends associate an :class:`~.ArgumentMap` with each system call event.

:class:`~.ArgumentMap` allows inspecting and modifying the arguments passed to
each system call. Argument map abstracts operating system specific system call
conventions and makes it possible to access arguments through a list-like
object. As with :class:`~.Process` objects, argument maps are specific to each
back end as they depend on intricate knowledge about system call conventions.

By indexing argument map objects, we can get the raw values passed in through
registers and/or memory, depending on the calling conventions. However, it is
noteworthy that Nitro does not currently try to further analyze the content of
these values and this is left to the user if they require such functionality.

.. note:: There is ongoing work on designing mechanisms for easier extraction of
          higher-level data structures from the raw arguments. This space is
          likely going to change as the work progresses further.



